---
layout: post
title: 'Weekly Reader → ✓✓ Read Receipts'
image: assets/interpersonal-behaviour.jpg
image_link:
image_caption:
---
I had to rethink the <cite>Weekly Reader</cite>—this was at the forefront of my mind while I was considering [how this blog frames culture](/reframe-rehang-reassess)—I never really liked the name but I ended up using it because it's simple and vaguely descriptive. But, it came to a point where my reticence to post was partly down to an irritation with <cite>'Weekly Reader'</cite>—what was the point of putting effort into a post only to hide it behind a dull title?

My relationship to the blog came to feel like a friend I'd left on read receipts. I've done it with people. People do it with me. It's a state of existence that's perhaps unique in history; knowing that they know that you know… _et cetera_. I enjoy writing. I meant to update the blog. I was still reading every day, I drafted posts, I always meant to publish. But, for one reason or another, I didn't get around to it. Soon, the cycle of anxious failure to send surrounds you and merges with bills and emails and applications. So—it's now <cite>✓✓ Read Receipts</cite>. It's a little more interesting, and it reflects the fact that sometimes I get distracted, or forget, or can't think what to say.

In the course of reassessing everything I went through some of the old writing I did when I first started this blog, just over seven years back, before I'd properly started studying or found my niche. I always imagined that this writing would be an embarrassment. I actually deleted most of this work. But some stayed in pdfs, printed pages, and forgotten folders. Taking a look over this work now, I'm actually pleased with the energy and commitment I had to even the smallest shows. Most of this writing was deleted. Some is truly awful, some is dated, and some I might rewrite and post. I've also included here some more recent work that never got published.

- <q>In 1997, with knowledge of his impending death, Roth started to videotape nearly every aspect of his life.</q> <cite>[Dieter Roth: Diaries at the Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh](https://jacobcharleswilson.com/dieter-roth-diaries-fruitmarket-edinburgh).</cite> The oldest piece I could recover, unfortunately I didn't back up the earlier work. Dieter Roth's obsessive and humourous archive was a solid show from one of my favourite galleries. Roth's work is unfortunately underrated. While there are pieces in the Tate's collection, it's a shame to see that they're only drawings and paintings. I suppose that food art doesn't keep well.
- <q>it's easy to pick out his wide-ranging influences; from the meticulous art of medieval manuscript illuminations, to ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, Pieter Bruegel paintings, and Where's Wally books.</q> <cite>[Tom Edwards: The Procession to Caute at Beach London](https://jacobcharleswilson.com/tom-edwards-procession-to-caute)</cite>. This remains one of my favourite shows I've ever seen in London. It shows that a simple conceit, few works, and a small space can create a very strong show. This piece is tiny, it was written on the bus back from the show. I always thought it would be worth interviewing him, but at the time didn't feel that I'd be able to. It's a double shame too, as the Beach shop has since closed.
- <q>The role of the embalmer is perhaps the most overlooked in the whole process of death. While doctors, detectives, and even pathologists have been elevated by fictional dramas and semi-autobiographies, embalmers remain hidden.</q> <cite>[Flat Death at the Open Eye Gallery, Liverpool](https://jacobcharleswilson.com/flat-death-edgar-martins-jordan-baseman)</cite>. The Open Eye Gallery is one of the stops I always make whenever I'm in Liverpool, which is about every three months or so. I was particularly taken by Jordan Baseman's work around the politics of embalmers, and the idea of their job paralleling that of the photographer.
- <q>Unfairly nestled into a corner of the room, a black and white photograph of a window-washer wiping suds off a shop front, the thick white bubbles merge with the border of the photo-paper with the effect that the man appears to be painting himself out of the photograph.</q> <cite>[Saul Leiter at The Photographers' Gallery, London](https://jacobcharleswilson.com/saul-leiter-photographers-gallery)</cite>. This piece could be reduced down to that single sentence. Not that the rest is unpublishable, rather that I'd like to publish a review that was just a single sentence, an image of images.
- <q>we found ourselves repeating a journey that thousands of families, hundreds of thousands of individuals, made each summer from the 1800s right up until the mid-twentieth century.</q> <cite>[Hop Picking in Kent with Kathrin Böhm](https://jacobcharleswilson.com/hop-picking-with-kathrin-bohm)</cite>. More recently, while I interned at <cite>Delfina Foundation</cite>, I worked with artist Kathrin Böhm. I wrote on a day trip we took out to the hop fields of Kent, part of <cite>Company Drinks'</cite> social history programme. Unfortunately this was never published, so it's an exclusive.
