---
title: 'New Year 2019'
layout: post
cdn-image: jcw-and-cat
image_link:
image_alt: A black and white photo of JCW holding a big furry cat.
image_caption:
description: A brief account of 2018.
---
I don't know if I managed to achieve many (any?) of the resolutions I made at the beginning of 2018, but it was a significant year for the fact that I reflected on what I waste my time doing and that I began to take steps to change this.

I decisively quit social media management - a pernicious line of work that's hassled me day-in day-out for some years now. While this meant that my resolution to visit more European cities went unfulfilled, it meant that I did find the time to return to some of the books that have lain on my shelf for years - even to expand my reading. I made a habit of picking up a new book every week or so from [<cite>BOOKS</cite>](http://www.books-peckham.com/), the second-hand bookshop at 125 Rye lane, Peckham. The trays of books change weekly, most cost a pound or two, and you can find anything - I highly recommend it.

Early in the year I immersed myself in the netherworld of sewerage systems to ask why when we talk about fatbergs we always talk about [condoms, wet wipes, nappies, and tampons](/condoms-wet-wipes-nappies-tampons-fatberg-somesuchstories). Over the summer I found my way through the tangled paths of garden mazes and Jorge Luis Borges' labyrinthine prose while writing a [second article](/garden-of-forking-paths-the-plant-print) for <cite>The Plant</cite>. Not long after, I was asked to contribute to the wine magazine [<cite>Above Sea Level</cite>](/pico-madeira-above-sea-level), which led to me reading about Portuguese colonialism, phylloxera plagues, and the collapse of the whaling industry in the North Atlantic. In the last few weeks of the year I wrote my first two articles for <cite>Huck</cite>, on the nearly-forgotten photographic practice of [Face in the Crowd](/alan-dein-face-in-the-crowd-huck-magazine) competitions and on Robin Friend's cynical vision of the [Bastard Countryside](/robin-friend-bastard-countryside-huck-magazine).

All the while, I found myself thinking about what I'm _actually doing_, about my place in the world, what I wanted to keep and what I wanted to move on from. How I use and more often _misuse_ my time. After quitting my job I deleted the bloated apps from my phone, I turned all notifications off, and by the end of the year I had left Facebook, rid myself of LinkedIn, and shut down every online account bar the absolutely essential ones. I already feel the difference, I no longer spend most of my day looking down at my phone, when I hear a buzz I don't instinctively check my inbox, and I've reversed the awful habit of hitting `ctrl+t tw enter` whenever I feel a pang of boredom. Hopefully this coming year I won't idle away hours scrolling up and down, perhaps I'll put my spare time to use.
